Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Terbiville.
John Anderson is quick to tell you that his year-long service in Vietnam was not frontline
duty, no direct combat.
He even goes so far as to call his job an easy one, but after hearing his story, I really
can't agree and I doubt if you will.
John Anderson did not fly the gunships, but he flew above them.
It is O1 Bird Dog Single Engineer Craft guiding them identifying landing zones and areas to
attack.
Nonetheless, John Anderson counts himself fortunate to have come home from Vietnam alive
and you'll understand why.
John, welcome.
I do.
I've been on this show for a long time.
You have led me to a lot of veterans and finally I get you on the show.
You served in Vietnam.
You talk about that your job was not as combative as other jobs, but still you do catch yourself
lucky to have come home from Vietnam because there were near misses in your service.
Oh yes.
It was very interesting.
You talk about them.
Well, to know what I went through, you'd have to know what I did and I flew that O1 Bird
Dog was an observation plane, right?
Suscena with a lot more power than the old O19.
And my job was to work with either naval gunfire or artillery or infantry on occasion, but
it evolved that my main job was I believe getting Americans out of trouble, working with
a Charlie Company 75th Ranger is a lot in my last six months and working with a unit
called the first of the 50th mechanized.
And in doing that, I witnessed a lot of fascinating things, educational things as to what people
are capable of doing when they're challenged.
If you had an American in trouble, you had more help than you knew what to do with.
Because everybody wanted to help out.
In fact, talking about working with the Rangers and you talked about identifying landing zones,
I watched a helicopter piloted by a man called Haas Cartwright.
He had a big handlebar mustache.
He was a big guy.
His last name was Cartwright.
Benanza was popular in those days, so we called him Haas.
He flew a UH1 hotel or Delta model.
I can't recall which.
And we would load these Rangers onto the helicopters.
We'd have some gunships or not, depending on what we were doing or where we were.
And he would land or the helicopter pilot would land in a succession of landing zones.
They were flying at treetop level.
So I couldn't fly over them and give away their position and they couldn't see the landing
zones.
So I'd give them headings and count off the meters as they were approaching the landing zone.
They would go into each one and at a pre-arranged landing zone, they would let the Rangers out.
Well, the North Vietnamese for their part being fairly smart.
Whenever they would come to a rest position, they would set up around the landing zone,
just in case Americans happen to land there.
So we've got triple canopy jungle and then these clearings.
In one day, Haas put a team on the ground.
He took off.
The North Vietnamese would always wait until the helicopter took off.
And they had put set up around this landing zone and they opened up on the six man team
of Rangers.
We call them long-range reconnaissance patrol or lurps.
As that happened and his cart right was coming out of the LZ, he took a least one round
through his main rotor blade, which set up a vibration that was pretty interesting
to handle.
And at that point, instead of flying away, he made that helicopter do something I have
never seen before since.
He did the tightest, steepest turn I've ever seen in a helicopter and he did it at low level
right over those trees and came back into the landing zone and sat there on the ground
until every one of those Rangers got on board.
You can see tracers coming out of the treeline flying by these guys.
You know that there's four rounds, four bullets for every tracer you see, but he sat on
the ground until everybody got on board and then took off.
And it's a single bravest thing I've ever witnessed.
And that's just one of the fascinating stories that you came back from Vietnam with.
A lot of them involved yourself.
I want to go back a little bit, talk about your first joining the Army.
You joined pretty much straight out of college.
Went to Texas, Western.
You were in school there when they won the NCAA basketball.
It certainly was and so was Anne, but we didn't know each other at that time.
My wife Anne was, we met later on.
You married your wife and in 1966 you've been married nearly 39 years.
She was an Army wife and she was home when you were serving in Vietnam.
We didn't talk about this earlier, but that had to been very difficult for you and her.
It was, any separation is difficult.
Separation under those circumstances is extremely difficult and that's why I feel so for
the troops that are serving now in Iraq and Afghanistan as I have in every conflict we've
sent people to.
I also left a nine-month-old son and he was 21 months when I got back and that was a
tough thing to do.
Fortunately, you came home to a 21-month-old son.
That's good.
You're training in Georgia.
Went to Fort Rucker, went to Fort Stewart.
You learned how to fly.
I learned how to fly.
Initially, a fixed-wing training, initial entry fixed-wing and at Fort Stewart, Georgia,
for four months and then to Fort Rucker for four months and came out with a single engine
land, multi-engine instrument rated and was glad to have it.
You had some experiences before you ever got to Vietnam that nearly never got you to Vietnam.
Talk about some of your early flying experiences.
I was technically, I guess you could call them crashes, but I was in two incidents.
I was in an ROTC flight training in school where my lack of experience helped me to run
off the runway into some sand and stand the plane up on its nose.
The other one was in flight school, flying with my, what you call, stick buddy, Bobby
Beale, who in fact tried to kill me three times.
But this day, he was doing a really bad landing.
It was a beautiful spring day and I had my elbow on the windowsill of the plane, the back
seat because it's a pilot sits in the front and observer in the back and he rounded out
about ten feet too high and fell in and bounced and then the engine caught and instead of
going around, he closed the throttle again and bounced again up even higher and finally
the third time he was about 30 feet in the air.
When he came down, I looked at the left wing tip and I thought, well, that's awfully close
to the ground and this is a really bad landing.
He got it straightened out, heading on the ground, broke ground like he was going to take
off finally, heading for a tree line of 60 foot pine trees and as I looked over his shoulder,
I noticed that we weren't climbing and the trees were coming up fast and I looked out
of the corner of my eye and here were 60 degrees of flaps on that bird dog, retarding our
climb.
So I said, Bob, bring up your flaps, not all of them, just half and I watched to make sure
we stopped at the takeoff setting and we went around and Bob said, John, I'm terrified.
And I said, well, Bob, would you like me to land this from the back seat?
And he thought a moment and said, I'm not that terrified.
So it came in and landed and I found out after we landed that we had put the wingtip
a foot into the ground, should a cartwheeled but it cut cleanly through the ground and
said until we got to the tree line, people on the ground could see trees above our
aircraft.
And that's when the flaps came up and we cleared the trees.
You must have thought Vietnam's going to be a breeze.
Sure.
Maybe if you could go through this.
You went jungle training and the Philippines before you went to Vietnam.
I'll talk about what was involved.
Yeah, that was jungle survival school and they taught us what we could eat and what
we couldn't and taught us how to trap water to drink and we made our own hammocks out
of parachutes and heard all this noise.
We thought it was people walking around at night and the jungle turned out its rats and
the jungle is full of rats.
So it's not a vacation spot necessarily.
But they had people looking for us and you had to try and keep from getting caught.
And it was an interesting training.
I think it prepared us pretty well in case anything happened in country.
And then you went in country?
Where exactly did you go initially?
Were you stationed?
They have an interesting process.
You go into the Long Bend replacement depot and I got assigned to the first aviation brigade
which assigned me to the 17th group in the Triangue which assigned me the 223rd battalion
in Quingyan which assigned me to the 183rd Reconnaissance Aviation Company at Fantheet
or actually at Dong Patin across the Bay from Camelon which assigned me to the second flight
of the tune at Fantheet.
And Fantheet is on the coast.
It's a coastal plane about 20 miles deep and then mountains that range upwards of a little
over 5,000 feet and triple canopy jungle in the valley.
And the mom capital of the world, it's a Vietnamese sauce made from very deceased fish.
And it smells really bad when it's being made but it's good to eat.
It tastes better than it smells.
It's certainly about a minute.
Talk a little bit more specifically about what your job was and the bird dog so people
really understand exactly what your mission was and how you helped out other pilots.
But primarily it was reconnaissance.
That was the number one job looking for the enemy wherever we were assigned to look.
I did a lot of naval gunfire support.
I'd fly a Marine or Navy person in the back seat.
We'd adjust the ships gunfire where they could reach inland.
I worked with the artillery batteries to help them register and then I would fire artillery
when there was an event that called for attacking the enemy with artillery.
I worked with, like I said, the first of 50th mechanized.
My job, since they make a lot of noise and aren't going to surprise anybody, was to fire
artillery in front of them and set off any mines that might be there.
You'd get secondary explosions after your artillery round went off and that would indicate
that there were mines in there.
I got used to working with them a lot.
The most interesting job really was the Rangers, the 75th Rangers.
That led to a lot of interesting events because their job was to go out into that mountainous
area into the triple canopy, 300 foot tall tree jungle and find North Vietnamese.
Our job was to help them go in, to help them when they were there in case they lost communications
or gotten trouble, got jumped by a larger force which happened all too often and then to
help them get out.
I would either use gunships to help get them out.
If they were in contact or I had one occasion in particular, I was called on to fire artillery
and we had moved to battery on top of a mountain and of 105 millimeter artillery.
This six man lurptime was running from North Vietnamese.
They'd gotten outnumbered and were being chased running full tilt through the jungle.
My job was to call artillery on the Vietnamese, on the North Vietnamese, but I couldn't
see anybody.
I couldn't see the Americans.
I couldn't see the Vietnamese.
I would call the artillery between the North Vietnamese and the Americans and I would
figure that it was between because the lurps would tell me by the shrapnel coming to
the trees if I was getting too close to them.
It was a situation when you're firing artillery close to US troops.
It can scare you.
Most frightened I've ever been was when I used the wrong gun target line and thought I'd
landed too close as some troops with an eight inch gun.
That'll ruin your whole day.
In this case, because you know you're firing close to Americans, you first give the command
to the artillery battery danger and then when it's really close you say danger close and
that's the way it was this whole time until they got to an LZ and got picked up.
That I count as a singular event helping those guys get out of trouble.
You flew your aircraft not directly over the targets so it's not give away the location
and you also flew about a thousand feet above the trees mostly.
You were essentially out of harm's way because you were too far up for the enemy to normally
just shoot at you normally.
But sometimes you did get down there I guess because of cloud cover.
Well cloud cover or if we were looking for something in particular, sometimes you can't
see from above what you're looking for.
I could tell from a thousand feet for example after a while you become trained to where
you can pick things out your eyes get better and I could tell from a thousand feet up if
the trail had been used in the last little while just by the difference in color.
And then we could drop down.
Now understand, again I told you this before, there's a difference between courage and
confidence.
I didn't have a lot of courage but I developed a lot of confidence and you might call it
being young and stupid too.
But I could drop my flaps and fly that plane very slowly and we would fly over a trail
where we'd seen that somebody had been there.
One particular case in American had been killed by a sniper and we were looking for the
guy and we followed this trail by the back cedar looking to see which direction the footprints
went.
And so you had to get down pretty low to do that but again I didn't as long as I was
inside my airplane I didn't feel threatened.
So it didn't matter how low or how high it was.
And that's where the confidence came in.
You brought some pictures with you and I want to go to some of those we're going to close
in on some of the pictures to sort of give people an idea.
First off you can look right there at that monitor right over there and you can see the
first picture what that is you and what are we looking at.
I'm in training there at Fort Rucker Alabama.
I'm by that time I believe I'm a first lieutenant and that may have even been the day where
the wives came out to watch us land and take off over a string barrier with penance hanging
down.
So that was the...
And that is the bird dog that's what you were right there.
That's what you were trained to fly the last part of your training and the truth.
You were the entire tour of Vietnam.
That's correct.
Okay.
I'm going to go to another picture.
That's the ocean in the background and that's the one end of the runway is right below
that picture and that hanger is our hanger and the building you see to the left was where
I lived the first six months I was there.
It's an old French post and we had running water, no heat but running water.
So I took a lot of cold showers and those are revetments made out of 55 gallon oil drums
that we parked the aircraft in that are surrounding the hanger.
In fact there is an aircraft there in that one revetment is an Air 4-0-2.
How was all of this built?
How?
Yeah.
Most of that was built by the French.
That was built by the French.
Okay.
And you see that red cross there that's the dust off pad.
Right.
Because after I left there they moved an aid station into that building and that's where
we would take wounded.
Okay.
What are we looking at here?
That's a typical fire base I believe that was a 105 battery of artillery, usually six
tubes of 105 millimeter artillery.
And that's out in the middle of that coastal plain somewhere.
I don't know which one that was.
We had about three 105 batteries and one battery that was a combination of eight inch and
one seven five.
And you took this picture from here?
Yes.
Christmas time.
Here's a Christmas in Vietnam and we had a little beach party and the man on the right
was the platoon leader at the time.
He was a captain Billy J.C., S.E.A.Y.
And he had been an NCO with the first infantry division his first tour.
So this was his second exposure of Vietnam.
And that's me sitting on the little boat looking a lot thinner than I looked today.
Not that much.
But that was Christmas away from home.
So you tried to get as many smiles as you could.
We smile a lot.
People can do that even under difficult circumstances.
They can make light humor and good times release the stress.
Final picture.
This is a picture that we think that someone else took and that that indeed could be you.
It's been a long time.
That's what the bird dog looked like flying.
That's right.
The reason we think that that's my bird dog in the background is because that's not my
camera that took that picture.
And somebody would have given that to me to take home.
In the right side of that picture you see the back end of a rocket tube.
My bird dogs were armed with four 2.75 inch bite phosphorus rockets.
And we use them for marking the targets.
Two under each wing.
Fascinating pictures.
Thank you for bringing those.
You talked about I think the first time you went up in Vietnam I believe you got shot at.
Oh yeah.
And you weren't really sure that you were what exactly it was.
Tell that story.
Well it was a first flight in our province.
And a Marine first lieutenant who was an ancient guy.
He was all of 30 years old.
So we thought he was really old.
He took me out into the area to fire a nibble gunfire.
And on the way out he said I think there's a guy in this big bush down there.
And the bush was about 30 feet across and 30 feet tall.
So being the fresh out of flight school guy was I knew how to bring the plane down and
fly around the bush.
And sure enough I saw the guy and I heard this noise and I recognized the noise.
It was a clattering sound.
And I went around the bush and it stopped and as I came back around the side where the
guy was I heard the noise again and I thought what's wrong with my airplane.
I looked at the gauges and couldn't see anything wrong.
Coming back around one more time and I thought when I heard that noise again I thought Larry
Doke is pulling a trick on a rookie.
This is something they do to all the new guys.
And I turned around and looked at him in the back seat and I said what is that noise.
And he was sitting there with his feet on the floor in his hands in his lap calmly looking
out the window and we were probably about 50 feet above the ground.
And he said you idiot we're getting shot at.
And that was an AK-47 shooting that is.
And that's what it sounded like.
That's what it sounded like.
First time you'd heard it, first time I'd heard it, but you probably didn't forget it.
I remembered.
I can still hear it.
You can still hear it.
One of the fascinating stories that you told me was about a mission that ended up a lot
better than it could have.
And you know which one I'm talking about where you had to do a little wrestling with a
parachute and a flare.
Talk about how that developed and how it came out.
So one night, I did a lot of night flying and I enjoyed flying at night.
I was the alert pilot and I was called out to help place where either a Vietnamese National
Guard or Arvin Army of Vietnam compound had been hit and taken some casualties.
And we were trying to get the North Vietnamese that had hit them.
We had an Air Force gunship, C-119 gunship with a 20-millimeter Vulcan Gatling gun.
And they were flying about 4,500 feet and flying north of the highway.
And I was flying south of the highway.
We did racetrack patterns.
And they were kicking out flares and even with the flares they couldn't see the ground,
but I could.
And I could actually adjust their fire by telling them how far off the target they were and
the target was screen beds and we figured the enemy would use the screen beds to hide
their movement as they went back north to the mountains to escape.
Well I didn't realize it but they had kicked out an extra flare south of the highway so
that a dust off helicopter could go in and pick up the wounded.
And of course these things were burning out above my altitude.
And I remember looking out to the right.
I was flying west at the time, looking out to the right and looking in front of me just
in time to see a white blur in front of my nose.
And it's one of those things where it's instant recognition.
You don't have to think the words.
You just know what it is.
And I hit right rudder and right aileron as hard as I could to try to turn away.
And not being the bravest guy in the world, I actually flinched and I sort of close my
eyes and turn my head to the right.
And the next thing I knew I heard this loud wham and the plane snapped to the left and
I thought I had lost a wing.
But I kept the right rudder in and I got it straightened out and I looked up and the
wham was this canister that hangs down that is coated with chemicals that burns and that's
the flare.
And it's suspended from a 16 foot diameter canopy parachute.
And the canister had hit the underside of the wing and left about a three inch dent.
And the parachute deployed over the top of the wing with its shroud lines wrapped around
my rocket tubes and it acted like a big air break.
So at that point it slowed me down to about 70 knots which is a little more than 70 miles
an hour.
And I had the plane going straight but I could only make left turns.
And the winds were very strong and I told the Air Force pilot that I couldn't play anymore
and I was going back to the base which is about 20 minutes away.
And so I did a left turn back to the base and I was maybe five minutes into the flight
back and I remembered that I had a Vietnamese observer in the back seat.
I'd been sort of busy and had unfortunately forgotten about him.
So I keed the mic and turned and smiled at him real big and said pretty exciting, huh?
And this guy was the littlest observer we had, the littlest Vietnamese I ever knew.
He had ripped this baby fire extinguisher out of a metal clamp on the back of my seat.
He hadn't opened the clamp we found out later he ripped it out.
He was holding it as if that would put out the fire because what happened was dragging
that thing through the air was like blowing on the embers of a campfire and it burst into
flame.
And it was giving off enough light that I could read the lettering on my white phosphorus
rockets and I could see my fuel vent dripping fuel and I can still see it today.
And this young man was so scared that you've heard the expression trembling like a leaf,
his entire body from his head to his boots and I looked was vibrating.
He was so scared.
And the string from that puny little fire extinguisher wasn't going to get to the flare.
But eventually it went out of his own accord and I did a left turn onto final.
I felt I had the land into the wind.
Unfortunately into the wind meant I landed over the face of a cliff that this airfield was
built on the edge of a 200 foot cliff.
And in getting on final starting my descent I had never landed in that much wind with
a parachute hanging over my wing before so I didn't know how to judge it.
And my rate of descent was carrying me into the face of the cliff.
And I added full power and was still coming down into the face of the cliff.
And the only other choice was to turn off into the ocean at night, dark night, landing
away from shore with no flotation gear, with a survival vest, full of radios and first
aid kits and water and two bandaliers of M16 magazines around my chest like Punch O'Villia.
And a Vietnamese in the back seat that I'm responsible for to get out.
I figured we'd have to walk along the bottom because there's no way we could swim with
the combat boots and all that.
So I elected to stay on course as long as I could and only turn off and ruin the plane
in the water if that was the last choice.
And whether you ascribe it to the power finally starting to lift me up or the parachute ripping
or God lifting up and giving me a little mercy.
I remember clearing the face of the cliff close enough that I could look down and see the
tango foot barbed wire and a bunker to my left and clear the road that ran right there
and landed on the overrun of the runway.
And there's a picture of my crew chiefs giving me a plaque with a piece of the parachute
on it and a picture of me holding the parachute by the plane.
So it was an interesting night.
Interesting night.
They ended up good.
There were good nights and there were bad nights.
Unfortunately, we only have about a minute left.
You talked about a reflection that you had when you left Vietnam that changed 20 years
later.
I need you to be real quick.
But tell me that again.
Well knowing what I know today about our effort in Vietnam, I would do it again.
I would absolutely do it again because I felt what I did was important.
But for years I regretted not having killed more North Vietnamese, more communists.
Now however, I regret having had to kill anybody.
I'd still do it.
I'd still go there and do my job.
But I realized that most of those people were forced to be there.
They had families and I regret having to kill anybody.
And I think that's the way we ought to look at war is that you don't relish it.
You don't relish hurting people.
But sometimes you've got to do it.
John Anderson, thank you for your service and thank you for being here.
Wish we had more time.
It's a wonderful story.
Like so many brave soldiers of Vietnam, John Anderson indeed found himself in harm's
way.
And as he himself has said, he did his job not without fear, but indeed with confidence
in his training and his ability.
Like all veterans of that conflict, it's sometimes a difficult story to tell and it
always should be.
It's the same kind of stories we hear today from the war on terror.
Also difficult to tell, but we must all listen with uncommon pride.
We salute Brazos Valley, veteran, Major John Anderson and thank him and all veterans
for their service.
And thank you to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbaville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
All right.
We did it.
Thank you very much.